Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the antiemetics.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the antiemetics. Begin with the physiology of nausea and vomiting.
Vomiting is a protective reflex coordinated by the vomiting centre in the medulla,
which integrates inputs from several sources and drives the motor act of emesis.
The key inputs are: the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema on the
floor of the fourth ventricle, which lies outside the blood-brain barrier and
senses emetogenic substances in the blood, including drugs such as opioids;
the vestibular apparatus, important in motion sickness; the gastrointestinal tract,
via vagal afferents responding to distension, irritation and serotonin release;
and higher centres, mediating emesis from sight, smell, memory and anxiety.
These pathways use particular neurotransmitters and receptors — dopamine D2,
serotonin 5HT3, histamine H1, muscarinic,
and neurokinin NK1 receptors — which are the targets of the antiemetic drugs.
So vomiting is coordinated by the vomiting centre receiving
chemoreceptor-trigger-zone, vestibular, gastrointestinal and higher inputs,
mediated by dopamine, serotonin, histamine,
muscarinic and neurokinin receptors that the antiemetics block.
What are the risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting?
Postoperative nausea and vomiting is common and distressing,
and its risk can be predicted, which guides prophylaxis.
The widely used Apfel score counts four patient and anaesthetic factors:
female sex, a history of postoperative nausea and vomiting or of motion sickness,
being a non-smoker, and the expected use of postoperative opioids;
the more factors present, the higher the risk.
Other contributory factors are anaesthetic — the use of volatile agents and nitrous
oxide, and opioids — and surgical, certain procedures such as gynaecological,
abdominal, middle-ear and squint surgery carrying higher risk,
as do longer operations.
Identifying the high-risk patient allows a multimodal prophylactic strategy and the
use of techniques that reduce the risk.
So the risk factors are summarised by the Apfel score — female sex,
previous nausea or motion sickness,
non-smoking and postoperative opioids — together with volatile agents,
nitrous oxide and certain types of surgery.
Describe the 5HT3-receptor antagonists.
The serotonin 5HT3-receptor antagonists, ondansetron,
granisetron and the longer-acting palonosetron,
block 5HT3 receptors both peripherally on vagal afferents in the gut and centrally
in the chemoreceptor trigger zone, where serotonin released from gut
enterochromaffin cells, including in response to surgery and chemotherapy,
drives emesis.
They are effective, widely used first-line prophylactic and treatment antiemetics,
given near the end of surgery for prophylaxis, and are generally well tolerated.
Their adverse effects are headache, constipation and flushing, and, importantly,
prolongation of the QT interval, so caution and dose limits apply,
particularly with other QT-prolonging drugs and electrolyte disturbance.
So the 5HT3 antagonists, ondansetron being the prototype,
are effective and well-tolerated first-line antiemetics acting peripherally and
centrally on serotonin pathways, with QT prolongation as the principal caution.
Describe dexamethasone as an antiemetic.
Dexamethasone, a corticosteroid, is an effective antiemetic whose mechanism in this
role is not fully understood but may involve central effects and a reduction in
inflammation and in the release of emetogenic mediators.
It is given as a single dose at induction, rather than at the end of surgery,
because it has a slow onset and a long duration,
providing prophylaxis well into the postoperative period,
and a single dose is used to avoid the adverse effects of repeated steroid dosing.
It has the added benefits of some analgesia and an improvement in wellbeing.
Its relevant cautions are a transient rise in blood glucose,
relevant in the diabetic, and the theoretical concern about a single dose in
particular contexts; it is a valuable component of multimodal prophylaxis.
So dexamethasone is an effective antiemetic given as a single dose at induction for
its slow-onset, long-lasting prophylactic effect,
with hyperglycaemia the main practical caution.
Describe the dopamine antagonists used as antiemetics.
The dopamine D2-receptor antagonists act at the chemoreceptor trigger zone,
where dopamine is an important emetic transmitter. Several groups are used.
Metoclopramide is a D2 antagonist with prokinetic 5HT4 action,
modestly antiemetic and useful where gastric stasis contributes,
but limited by extrapyramidal effects.
Droperidol, a butyrophenone, is a potent antiemetic in low dose,
but it prolongs the QT interval, which led to a regulatory warning and a fall in
its use, though low doses are still used. The phenothiazine prochlorperazine is
used for nausea, including vestibular causes.
Domperidone acts peripherally without central extrapyramidal effects but prolongs
the QT. Their shared dopamine-antagonist adverse effects are extrapyramidal
reactions — dystonia, akathisia, parkinsonism — and, for several,
QT prolongation and sedation.
So the dopamine antagonists — metoclopramide, droperidol,
prochlorperazine — act at the chemoreceptor trigger zone,
limited by extrapyramidal effects and QT prolongation.
Describe the antihistamines and antimuscarinics used as antiemetics.
The antihistamines and antimuscarinics are particularly useful for nausea of
vestibular and motion-related origin,
reflecting the histamine and muscarinic transmission of the vestibular pathways.
Cyclizine is a commonly used H1-antihistamine with antimuscarinic activity,
effective for a broad range of postoperative and motion-related nausea;
it can cause sedation, dry mouth and, given rapidly intravenously,
a tachycardia and a transient unpleasant sensation.
Promethazine is a sedating antihistamine with antiemetic and antihistaminic effects.
The antimuscarinic hyoscine, hyoscine hydrobromide,
is effective against motion sickness and is available as a transdermal patch for
sustained effect, but causes the antimuscarinic effects of dry mouth,
blurred vision, sedation and, in the elderly, confusion.
So the antihistamines such as cyclizine and the antimuscarinic hyoscine are
valuable antiemetics, especially for vestibular and motion-related nausea,
with sedation and antimuscarinic effects as their drawbacks.
What are the NK1 antagonists and other newer or adjunctive agents?
The neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists, of which aprepitant is the example,
block the action of substance P at NK1 receptors in the vomiting centre and
chemoreceptor trigger zone.
They are effective and long-acting,
used particularly for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
and, increasingly, for high-risk postoperative nausea and vomiting,
often in combination.
Among other agents, propofol has antiemetic properties,
so a total intravenous anaesthetic technique using propofol reduces postoperative
nausea and vomiting, an important non-pharmacological-seeming but pharmacological
strategy.
The alpha-two agonists and adequate hydration and opioid-sparing analgesia also
reduce nausea.
So the NK1 antagonists such as aprepitant block substance P for effective,
long-acting antiemesis, and propofol-based total intravenous anaesthesia is itself
an antiemetic strategy, both useful additions in the high-risk patient.
How should antiemetics be used for prophylaxis against postoperative nausea and
vomiting?
The modern approach is risk-stratified and multimodal.
I would assess the risk, for example with the Apfel score,
and reduce the baseline risk by using regional anaesthesia where possible,
a propofol-based total intravenous technique,
the avoidance of nitrous oxide and the minimisation of volatile agents and opioids
through multimodal analgesia, and adequate hydration.
For prophylaxis I would give antiemetics from different classes,
acting at different receptors, according to the risk:
commonly dexamethasone at induction and a 5HT3 antagonist such as ondansetron
towards the end of surgery for moderate risk,
adding further agents — a dopamine antagonist, an antihistamine,
droperidol or an NK1 antagonist — for higher risk.
Combining classes is more effective than increasing the dose of one.
So prophylaxis combines risk reduction with multimodal antiemetics from different
receptor classes, escalated according to the assessed risk.
How would you treat established postoperative nausea and vomiting?
For established postoperative nausea and vomiting I would first look for and treat
contributory causes — hypotension, hypoxia, pain, opioids, hypovolaemia,
hypoglycaemia, and surgical causes such as ileus or blood in the stomach — and
ensure adequate hydration.
For drug treatment, the principle is to give an antiemetic from a different class
to any used for prophylaxis, since giving more of the same class within its
duration adds little; so if a 5HT3 antagonist and dexamethasone were given
prophylactically, I would treat breakthrough nausea with a dopamine antagonist,
an antihistamine such as cyclizine, or a small dose of droperidol,
choosing by the patient and the cause.
I would consider a propofol-based technique if ongoing sedation is appropriate.
So established nausea is treated by correcting contributory causes and giving an
antiemetic from a different receptor class to that used in prophylaxis,
individualised to the patient.
Pull it together: how do you approach antiemetic therapy rationally?
I would base it on the physiology and on risk.
Understanding that emesis is driven through dopamine, serotonin, histamine,
muscarinic and neurokinin receptors, I would target these,
combining drugs from different classes for additive effect rather than escalating a
single agent.
I would assess each patient's risk,
reduce the baseline risk with regional or propofol-based techniques,
opioid-sparing analgesia, avoidance of nitrous oxide and good hydration,
and give multimodal prophylaxis scaled to risk — typically dexamethasone at
induction and a 5HT3 antagonist, with further agents for the high-risk.
For established nausea I would correct contributory causes and use a different
class from that used in prophylaxis.
I would respect the specific cautions — QT prolongation with the 5HT3 antagonists
and droperidol, extrapyramidal effects with the dopamine antagonists,
sedation and antimuscarinic effects with the antihistamines,
and hyperglycaemia with dexamethasone.
So rational antiemetic therapy is physiology-based, risk-stratified,
multimodal and mindful of each class's cautions.
Map each emetic input pathway to its principal neurotransmitter and the drugs that
act there.
Mapping the pathways guides rational drug choice.
The chemoreceptor trigger zone, sensing blood-borne emetogens,
signals chiefly through dopamine D2 and serotonin 5HT3 receptors,
blocked by the dopamine antagonists and the 5HT3 antagonists.
The gastrointestinal vagal afferents, activated by surgery,
distension and chemotherapy, release serotonin acting on 5HT3 receptors,
blocked by the 5HT3 antagonists, and respond to prokinetics.
The vestibular pathway, important in motion sickness,
signals through histamine H1 and muscarinic receptors,
blocked by the antihistamines and antimuscarinics such as cyclizine and hyoscine.
Higher centres and the vomiting centre involve multiple receptors,
including neurokinin NK1, blocked by aprepitant.
So the chemoreceptor trigger zone is dopaminergic and serotonergic,
the gut serotonergic, the vestibular pathway histaminergic and muscarinic,
and the central integration neurokinin-mediated — which is why matching the
antiemetic to the likely pathway, and combining classes, is the rational approach.
Give the dosing and timing detail for ondansetron and dexamethasone in PONV
prophylaxis.
For prophylaxis, the timing of each reflects its pharmacology.
Ondansetron, a 5HT3 antagonist with a duration of several hours,
is given towards the end of surgery,
so that its effect covers the early postoperative period when nausea is most
likely, at a standard adult dose of around four milligrams intravenously.
Dexamethasone, by contrast, has a slow onset and a long duration,
so it is given at induction rather than at the end,
providing prophylaxis well into the postoperative period,
as a single dose of around four to eight milligrams.
Giving each at its optimal time, and combining the two,
which act by different mechanisms, gives additive prophylaxis covering both the
early and the later postoperative period.
So ondansetron is given near the end of surgery and dexamethasone at induction,
each timed to its onset and duration, and combined for additive,
complementary cover — a practical point frequently tested.
Recount the droperidol QT story and its current use.
Droperidol, a butyrophenone, is a highly effective antiemetic in low doses acting
at dopamine D2 receptors.
Some years ago a regulatory warning — a black-box warning — was issued because of
its association with QT-interval prolongation and the risk of torsades de pointes,
which led to a marked decline in its use and its withdrawal in some places.
Subsequent analysis indicated that, at the low antiemetic doses used,
the risk of clinically significant QT prolongation is small,
and droperidol has returned to use as an effective antiemetic at low dose,
with attention to QT risk factors — avoiding it or using caution with other
QT-prolonging drugs, electrolyte disturbance and pre-existing QT prolongation.
So droperidol's effectiveness was eclipsed by a QT-related warning that,
on reappraisal, applies mainly at higher doses,
and it is now used again at low antiemetic doses with appropriate attention to QT
risk — an instructive example of risk reassessment.
What is the evidence for combining antiemetics,
and what does it show about prophylaxis?
The principle of combining antiemetics from different classes is supported by trial
evidence, notably a large factorial study of antiemetic interventions which
examined combinations of a 5HT3 antagonist, dexamethasone and droperidol,
together with a propofol-based technique and the avoidance of nitrous oxide.
It showed that each intervention reduced the risk of postoperative nausea and
vomiting by a similar relative amount,
that the effects were broadly independent and additive,
and that interventions should therefore be combined according to the patient's
baseline risk — more interventions for higher risk — rather than relying on a
single agent.
This underpins the modern risk-stratified, multimodal approach.
So the evidence shows that antiemetic interventions act independently and
additively, justifying combining drugs from different classes and risk-reduction
strategies in proportion to the assessed risk,
rather than escalating the dose of one agent.
Describe antiemetic management in pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum.
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy is common, and its severe form,
hyperemesis gravidarum, causes dehydration,
electrolyte disturbance and weight loss requiring admission.
Management balances efficacy against fetal safety.
First-line drug treatment uses agents with reassuring safety data — antihistamines
such as cyclizine and promethazine,
and the combination of doxylamine with pyridoxine — with the dopamine antagonists
metoclopramide and prochlorperazine as further options,
and ondansetron used where needed, with discussion of the evidence on its safety.
Severe cases need rehydration with fluids and electrolytes,
thiamine to prevent Wernicke's encephalopathy, and sometimes corticosteroids.
So nausea and vomiting of pregnancy is treated with antihistamines and pyridoxine
first, then dopamine antagonists and ondansetron as needed, with rehydration,
electrolyte correction and thiamine in hyperemesis gravidarum,
the choice weighing efficacy against fetal safety — a distinct context from
postoperative nausea.
Describe the antiemetic management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting is classified by timing into acute,
within the first day; delayed, over the following days; and anticipatory,
a conditioned response before treatment.
Its management is highly protocolised and depends on the emetogenic potential of
the regimen.
For highly emetogenic chemotherapy, a combination is used: a 5HT3 antagonist,
particularly the long-acting palonosetron, for the acute phase;
an NK1 antagonist such as aprepitant,
which is especially valuable for the delayed phase; and dexamethasone;
sometimes with olanzapine added.
Anticipatory nausea is managed with benzodiazepines and behavioural techniques.
So chemotherapy-induced nausea is managed by a timing-based,
regimen-stratified combination — 5HT3 antagonist,
NK1 antagonist and dexamethasone for highly emetogenic regimens,
covering the acute and delayed phases — illustrating the same multimodal,
mechanism-based principle as postoperative prophylaxis,
with the NK1 antagonists particularly important for the delayed phase.
What non-pharmacological and anaesthetic-technique measures reduce PONV?
Reducing the baseline risk by technique is as important as the antiemetic drugs.
The anaesthetic technique can be chosen to lower risk:
regional anaesthesia avoids the emetogenic effects of general anaesthesia where
feasible; a propofol-based total intravenous technique reduces nausea,
propofol being antiemetic, compared with volatile agents; nitrous oxide is avoided;
and opioids are minimised through multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia.
Adequate hydration reduces nausea, as does the avoidance of hypotension.
Among non-pharmacological measures,
stimulation of the P6 acupuncture point at the wrist has evidence of benefit.
So PONV is reduced by regional or propofol-based total intravenous techniques,
avoidance of nitrous oxide, opioid-sparing analgesia,
good hydration and avoidance of hypotension,
with P6 acupoint stimulation as an adjunct — baseline risk reduction that
complements the antiemetic drugs in the multimodal approach.
What is post-discharge nausea and vomiting, and why does it matter?
Post-discharge nausea and vomiting is nausea and vomiting occurring after the
patient has left hospital following day surgery, in the hours and days at home.
It matters because, with the growth of day-case surgery,
much of the burden of postoperative nausea now occurs after discharge,
beyond the reach of the immediate prophylaxis, and it causes distress,
unplanned contacts and readmissions and delays return to normal activity.
It is not fully prevented by the antiemetics given during surgery,
whose effect may have waned.
Its management includes identifying at-risk patients,
using longer-acting agents such as dexamethasone and palonosetron,
and providing the patient with antiemetics to take at home with clear instructions.
So post-discharge nausea and vomiting is the substantial after-discharge burden of
nausea in day surgery, addressed by longer-acting prophylaxis and by supplying
take-home antiemetics, an increasingly recognised target as day surgery expands.
How would you manage the patient at very high risk of PONV?
For the patient at very high risk — several Apfel factors,
a strong history of postoperative nausea,
or high-risk surgery — I would combine maximal baseline-risk reduction with
multiple-class prophylaxis.
I would, where feasible, use regional anaesthesia,
or a propofol-based total intravenous technique, avoid nitrous oxide,
minimise opioids through multimodal analgesia,
and ensure good hydration and the avoidance of hypotension.
I would give prophylactic antiemetics from several different classes — typically
dexamethasone at induction, a 5HT3 antagonist towards the end,
and a further agent such as a low dose of droperidol or a dopamine antagonist or an
NK1 antagonist — and provide take-home antiemetics to cover the post-discharge
period.
For breakthrough nausea I would use yet another class.
So the very-high-risk patient receives combined technique-based risk reduction and
triple-class prophylaxis with take-home cover,
the fullest application of the multimodal, mechanism-based strategy.
Summarise the rational, mechanism-based approach to antiemesis.
I would ground antiemetic practice in the receptor physiology and in risk.
Knowing that emesis is driven through dopamine, serotonin, histamine,
muscarinic and neurokinin pathways,
I would target these and combine drugs from different classes for additive effect
rather than escalating one agent.
I would assess each patient's risk with a tool such as the Apfel score,
reduce the baseline risk with regional or propofol-based techniques,
opioid-sparing analgesia, avoidance of nitrous oxide and good hydration,
and give multimodal prophylaxis scaled to the risk — dexamethasone at induction,
a 5HT3 antagonist near the end, further agents for high risk — with take-home cover
for day cases.
For established nausea I would correct contributory causes and use a different
class. I would respect the class cautions — QT prolongation,
extrapyramidal effects, sedation and antimuscarinic effects, hyperglycaemia.
So rational antiemesis is physiology-based, risk-stratified, multimodal,
recovery- and discharge-conscious, and cautious of each class's adverse effects.
Describe the use of olanzapine and other multi-receptor agents as antiemetics.
Olanzapine is an atypical antipsychotic that,
because it antagonises multiple receptors involved in emesis — dopamine, serotonin,
histamine and muscarinic — is an effective broad-spectrum antiemetic.
It has become established particularly in the prevention and treatment of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting,
added to the standard combination for highly emetogenic regimens,
where it improves control especially of nausea and of the delayed phase,
and it is used for refractory and breakthrough nausea.
Its breadth of receptor action is the basis of its efficacy,
and its adverse effects include sedation. Similar multi-receptor breadth underlies
the antiemetic effect of some other agents.
So olanzapine is a multi-receptor antagonist — dopaminergic, serotonergic,
histaminergic and muscarinic — that is an effective broad-spectrum antiemetic,
valuable in chemotherapy-induced and refractory nausea,
illustrating how blocking several emetic pathways at once gives broad efficacy,
at the cost of sedation.
What is the role of the antimuscarinic hyoscine patch and of antiemetics for motion
sickness?
Motion sickness arises from the vestibular pathway,
which signals through muscarinic and histamine receptors,
so the most effective agents are the antimuscarinics and antihistamines rather than
the serotonin or dopamine antagonists that target the chemoreceptor trigger zone.
Hyoscine, hyoscine hydrobromide, is the most effective drug for motion sickness,
and the transdermal patch provides a sustained, convenient delivery over days,
useful for prophylaxis, releasing the drug slowly to avoid peaks;
it causes the antimuscarinic effects of dry mouth, blurred vision, drowsiness and,
in the elderly, confusion.
The sedating antihistamines such as cyclizine and cinnarizine are alternatives.
These same agents are useful for the postoperative nausea of patients with a
vestibular component or motion sensitivity.
So motion sickness is best prevented with the antimuscarinic hyoscine,
conveniently as a transdermal patch, or sedating antihistamines,
reflecting the muscarinic and histaminergic basis of vestibular nausea — a
different target from chemoreceptor-trigger-zone emesis.
Discuss the single-dose safety of dexamethasone and the concerns about its use.
Dexamethasone is highly effective and widely used as a single antiemetic dose at
induction, and the question of its safety is frequently raised.
As a single perioperative dose it is generally well tolerated,
with the main practical effect being a transient rise in blood glucose,
relevant in the diabetic and to be monitored,
and a theoretical concern about wound healing and infection that the evidence does
not substantiate for a single dose.
There has been debate about a possible association with infection or,
in cancer surgery, with outcome, but current evidence supports the safety and
benefit of a single dose for most patients.
Repeated dosing brings the familiar corticosteroid adverse effects and is avoided
for the antiemetic indication.
So a single dose of dexamethasone for antiemesis is generally safe,
its main effect a transient hyperglycaemia to monitor in diabetics,
with the corticosteroid adverse effects being a concern only of repeated dosing —
reassurance that supports its routine single-dose use.
What is the role of low-dose haloperidol as an antiemetic?
Haloperidol, a butyrophenone antipsychotic related to droperidol,
is an effective antiemetic at low doses through its dopamine D2 antagonism at the
chemoreceptor trigger zone, well below the doses used for its antipsychotic effect.
It has been used for postoperative nausea and vomiting and is valuable in
palliative care for nausea, including opioid-induced and chemical causes.
Like droperidol it can prolong the QT interval and cause extrapyramidal effects and
sedation, so it is used at low dose with attention to QT risk factors.
It offers an inexpensive, effective option,
particularly where other agents are unavailable or as an additional class in
multimodal therapy.
So low-dose haloperidol is an effective and economical dopamine-antagonist
antiemetic, useful in postoperative and palliative nausea,
sharing the QT-prolongation and extrapyramidal cautions of the butyrophenones —
another agent in the multimodal armamentarium.
How is opioid-induced nausea managed?
Opioids are a major cause of nausea and vomiting,
acting at the chemoreceptor trigger zone through dopamine and other receptors,
by reducing gastric emptying, and by sensitising the vestibular apparatus.
Management has two strands.
First, reduce the opioid load through multimodal,
opioid-sparing analgesia — paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
regional techniques and adjuncts — which reduces the cause;
and consider rotating to a different opioid in those particularly susceptible.
Second, treat the nausea with antiemetics targeting the relevant receptors —
dopamine antagonists and 5HT3 antagonists for the chemoreceptor-trigger-zone
component, antihistamines or antimuscarinics where there is a vestibular component,
and a prokinetic where gastric stasis contributes.
So opioid-induced nausea is managed by reducing the opioid through opioid-sparing
analgesia and, where appropriate, opioid rotation,
and by treating it with antiemetics matched to the dopaminergic,
gastric and vestibular mechanisms involved — cause reduction combined with
mechanism-targeted treatment.
What antiemetic considerations apply to children?
Children are prone to postoperative vomiting,
with certain surgery such as squint and tonsillectomy carrying high risk,
and the approach mirrors the adult multimodal,
mechanism-based strategy with paediatric-specific cautions.
The 5HT3 antagonists, particularly ondansetron,
and dexamethasone are the mainstays of prophylaxis and are effective and well
tolerated, often combined for high-risk surgery.
Importantly, the dopamine-antagonist prokinetic metoclopramide is used with
particular caution in children because of their susceptibility to extrapyramidal
and acute dystonic reactions, and is generally avoided or restricted.
Doses are weight-based.
Risk reduction by propofol-based technique,
opioid-sparing analgesia and good hydration applies as in adults.
So in children, ondansetron and dexamethasone are the first-line antiemetics,
combined for high-risk surgery, with metoclopramide avoided or restricted because
of the risk of dystonic reactions, and weight-based dosing throughout — the adult
principles with paediatric safety caveats.
What is the place of the cannabinoids and of benzodiazepines in nausea?
Both have niche antiemetic roles.
The cannabinoids, such as nabilone, a synthetic analogue of a cannabis constituent,
have antiemetic activity, used principally for chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting unresponsive to standard agents; their adverse effects — sedation,
dysphoria, dizziness and psychotomimetic effects — limit their use,
particularly in the elderly.
Benzodiazepines are not antiemetics in the receptor sense but are useful for the
anticipatory nausea and vomiting of chemotherapy, a conditioned,
anxiety-driven response before treatment,
which they relieve through their anxiolytic effect,
and they contribute to the management of nausea with a strong anxiety component.
So the cannabinoids are second-line antiemetics for refractory chemotherapy-induced
nausea, limited by central effects, and benzodiazepines address the anticipatory,
anxiety-driven nausea of chemotherapy — specialised additions to the antiemetic
repertoire beyond the main receptor-targeted classes.
How do you avoid compounding QT prolongation when combining antiemetics?
Because several antiemetics prolong the QT interval — notably the 5HT3 antagonists
such as ondansetron, and the butyrophenones droperidol and haloperidol — combining
them, or combining them with other QT-prolonging drugs,
can compound the effect and increase the risk of torsades de pointes,
so this is a real consideration in multimodal therapy.
The safeguards are to be aware of which agents prolong the QT,
to identify patients at risk — those with a pre-existing long QT,
electrolyte disturbance such as hypokalaemia or hypomagnesaemia, bradycardia,
or other QT-prolonging medication — to correct electrolytes,
to use the lowest effective doses, and to choose for the additional classes agents
that do not prolong the QT, such as dexamethasone, an antihistamine like cyclizine,
or an NK1 antagonist, rather than stacking QT-prolonging drugs.
So when combining antiemetics one avoids compounding QT prolongation by recognising
the culprit agents, correcting electrolytes, limiting doses,
and selecting non-QT-prolonging classes for combination — multimodal therapy chosen
with the QT in mind.
Describe the motor act of vomiting and the protective adaptations it requires.
Once the vomiting centre is sufficiently activated,
it coordinates a stereotyped motor sequence.
There is usually a prodrome of nausea with autonomic features — salivation, pallor,
sweating and tachycardia — and retrograde intestinal contractions.
Retching follows, with rhythmic contraction of the diaphragm and abdominal muscles
against a closed glottis.
Then expulsion occurs: a forceful contraction of the abdominal muscles and
diaphragm raises intra-abdominal and intragastric pressure,
the lower oesophageal sphincter and crural diaphragm relax,
and the gastric contents are expelled.
Crucially, protective adaptations prevent aspiration and nasal regurgitation — the
glottis closes, breathing is inhibited, and the soft palate elevates.
Under anaesthesia these protective reflexes are obtunded,
which is precisely why regurgitation and vomiting then threaten aspiration.
So vomiting is a coordinated reflex of nausea,
retching and expulsion with airway-protective reflexes that anaesthesia abolishes —
linking the physiology of emesis to the aspiration risk that antiemesis and
aspiration prophylaxis address.
How do you structure antiemetic prophylaxis by the number of risk factors?
A practical structure links the intensity of prophylaxis to the assessed risk,
for example by the Apfel count. The patient at low risk,
with none or one risk factor, may need no routine prophylaxis or a single agent,
while baseline-risk-reduction measures are applied to all.
The patient at moderate risk, with two factors,
receives prophylaxis with one or two agents from different classes — commonly
dexamethasone at induction and a 5HT3 antagonist towards the end.
The patient at high risk, with three or four factors,
receives two or three agents from different classes together with active risk
reduction by a propofol-based technique,
avoidance of nitrous oxide and opioid-sparing analgesia.
This graded approach matches benefit to need and avoids both under- and
over-treatment.
So antiemetic prophylaxis is structured by the number of risk factors — minimal or
single-agent for low risk, dual for moderate,
and multiple agents with technique-based risk reduction for high risk — a rational,
risk-proportionate strategy.
What is the significance of giving a rescue antiemetic from a different class?
The principle of using a different class for rescue follows from the pharmacology
of the receptors.
If a patient who received a particular antiemetic for prophylaxis develops
breakthrough nausea within that drug's duration of action,
giving a further dose of the same drug, or another acting on the same receptor,
adds little, because that receptor is already substantially blocked.
Greater benefit comes from blocking a different pathway,
so rescue treatment uses an agent from a class not already given — for instance,
a dopamine antagonist or an antihistamine after a 5HT3 antagonist and dexamethasone.
After the prophylactic drug's effect has fully worn off,
repeating it becomes reasonable.
So the significance of choosing a different class for rescue is that the receptor
of the prophylactic agent is already occupied,
making additional benefit dependent on targeting a different emetic pathway — a
direct application of the multi-receptor model to breakthrough nausea.
How does the avoidance of nitrous oxide and volatile agents reduce nausea?
Both the volatile anaesthetics and nitrous oxide are emetogenic,
contributing to postoperative nausea and vomiting,
so avoiding them reduces the baseline risk.
The volatile agents have a dose- and duration-related emetic effect,
which is why a propofol-based total intravenous technique,
propofol itself being antiemetic, lowers the incidence of nausea compared with a
volatile-based anaesthetic.
Nitrous oxide contributes to nausea,
possibly through effects on the middle ear and bowel and central mechanisms,
so omitting it reduces risk, particularly relevant in the higher-risk patient and
in ear surgery.
These technique choices act as independent,
additive interventions alongside the antiemetic drugs.
So avoiding nitrous oxide and minimising volatile agents — ideally with a
propofol-based technique — reduces nausea because these agents are themselves
emetogenic and propofol is antiemetic,
a technique-based contribution to the multimodal prevention of postoperative nausea
and vomiting.
What is the approach to nausea in the patient with gastroparesis or bowel
obstruction?
Where nausea and vomiting arise from impaired gastrointestinal motility,
the mechanism guides treatment.
In gastroparesis — delayed gastric emptying,
as in diabetes — a prokinetic that accelerates emptying, such as metoclopramide or,
in refractory cases, erythromycin, addresses the cause,
alongside treating the underlying condition;
domperidone is an alternative where central effects are to be avoided.
In mechanical bowel obstruction, by contrast, prokinetics are contraindicated,
because stimulating motility against an obstruction is harmful;
the management is nasogastric decompression to empty the stomach and relieve the
vomiting, with antiemetics that act centrally — such as cyclizine or a 5HT3
antagonist — and treatment of the obstruction.
So motility-related nausea is approached by its mechanism — prokinetics for
gastroparesis to speed emptying, but decompression and centrally acting antiemetics
for obstruction where prokinetics are contraindicated — matching the antiemetic
strategy to the cause.
How is the vestibular component of nausea best addressed?
Nausea with a vestibular component — in the motion-sensitive patient,
after middle-ear surgery, or with vertigo — is best addressed with the drugs that
target the histaminergic and muscarinic transmission of the vestibular pathway,
rather than the serotonin and dopamine antagonists aimed at the chemoreceptor
trigger zone, which are less effective for this component.
The antihistamines, such as cyclizine and cinnarizine,
and the antimuscarinic hyoscine, conveniently as a transdermal patch for sustained
prophylaxis, are the agents of choice.
Recognising the vestibular component,
for example in a patient with a history of motion sickness — itself an Apfel risk
factor — allows the inclusion of these agents in the multimodal plan.
So the vestibular component of nausea is best addressed with antihistamines and the
antimuscarinic hyoscine, matched to the histaminergic and muscarinic basis of
vestibular emesis, and included where a motion-sickness history or vestibular cause
is identified — again, the receptor model guiding drug choice.
Give a final, integrated summary of antiemetic practice.
Integrating it all: I would base antiemetic practice on the receptor physiology of
emesis and on individual risk.
I would assess risk with a tool such as the Apfel score,
and reduce the baseline risk in all patients through regional or propofol-based
techniques, the avoidance of nitrous oxide, opioid-sparing multimodal analgesia,
and good hydration.
I would give prophylaxis proportionate to risk,
combining agents from different receptor classes — typically dexamethasone at
induction and a 5HT3 antagonist near the end,
with further agents for higher risk — and provide take-home antiemetics for day
cases.
For established nausea I would correct contributory causes and use a different
class from that given prophylactically, matching the agent to the mechanism,
including antihistamines and antimuscarinics for the vestibular component and
prokinetics for gastric stasis.
I would respect each class's cautions — QT prolongation, extrapyramidal effects,
sedation, hyperglycaemia. So antiemetic practice is physiology-based,
risk-stratified, multimodal, mechanism-matched and safety-conscious.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Vomiting is coordinated by the medullary vomiting centre receiving inputs
from the chemoreceptor trigger zone (area postrema,
outside the blood-brain barrier), the vestibular apparatus,
gut vagal afferents and higher centres, mediated by dopamine D2, serotonin 5HT3,
histamine H1, muscarinic and neurokinin NK1 receptors.
Second, PONV risk is predicted by the Apfel score (female sex,
previous PONV/motion sickness, non-smoker,
postoperative opioids) plus volatile agents, nitrous oxide and certain surgery;
risk-stratification guides prophylaxis.
Third, 5HT3 antagonists (ondansetron) and single-dose dexamethasone at induction
are first-line prophylaxis; dopamine antagonists (metoclopramide, droperidol,
prochlorperazine), antihistamines (cyclizine) and antimuscarinics (hyoscine,
for vestibular/motion nausea) and NK1 antagonists (aprepitant) are additional
options.
Fourth, Combine antiemetics from different receptor classes rather than increasing
one drug's dose; reduce baseline risk with regional or propofol-based TIVA,
opioid-sparing analgesia, avoidance of nitrous oxide and good hydration.
Fifth, Key cautions: QT prolongation (5HT3 antagonists, droperidol),
extrapyramidal/dystonic reactions (dopamine antagonists),
sedation/antimuscarinic effects (antihistamines, hyoscine),
hyperglycaemia (dexamethasone); treat established PONV by correcting causes and
using a different class from that used in prophylaxis.
Thank you. That concludes the station.